.TH RDFLESS 1 "June 2025" "rdfless 0.2.8" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
rdfless \- a colorful pretty printer for RDF data with ANSI colors
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rdfless
[\fIOPTION\fR]... [\fIFILE\fR]...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B rdfless
is a command-line tool for pretty-printing RDF data with syntax highlighting and ANSI colors. It supports multiple RDF formats including Turtle, TriG, N-Triples, and N-Quads. The tool automatically detects the input format from file extensions and provides options for customizing the output format and appearance.

The tool includes robust error handling capabilities and can continue parsing even when encountering malformed RDF data. It also provides flexible filtering options to display only specific triples matching subject, predicate, or object criteria.

When no input files are specified, 
.B rdfless
reads from standard input. Output is written to standard output unless the
.B \-O
option is used to specify an output file.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Print help information and exit.
.TP
.B \-V, \-\-version
Print version information and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-expand
Expand prefixes instead of showing PREFIX declarations. When this option is used, all URIs are displayed in their full form rather than using namespace prefixes.
.TP
.B \-\-compact
Compact mode (opposite of \-\-expand). Show PREFIX declarations and use prefixes to shorten URIs. This is the default behavior.
.TP
.B \-\-format \fIFORMAT\fR
Override the input format detection. By default, the format is auto-detected from the file extension. Possible values are:
.RS
.IP \[bu] 2
.B turtle
\- Turtle format (.ttl files)
.IP \[bu] 2
.B trig
\- TriG format (.trig files)
.RE
.TP
.B \-\-pager
Enable paging for large outputs using an interactive pager.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-pager
Disable paging even if it would normally be enabled by configuration or auto-detection.
.TP
.B \-o, \-\-output \fIFILE\fR
Write output to the specified file instead of standard output. When writing to a file, ANSI colors are automatically disabled unless explicitly forced with theme options.
.TP
.B \-\-continue\-on\-error
Continue parsing even when encountering errors in the RDF data. Invalid triples are skipped, and parsing continues with the next valid statement. Error information is reported to stderr.
.TP
.B \-\-filter\-subject \fISUBJECT\fR
Filter RDF triples to show only those with the specified subject. The subject can be an IRI (e.g., <http://example.org/person>) or a prefixed name (e.g., ex:person).
.TP
.B \-\-filter\-predicate \fIPREDICATE\fR
Filter RDF triples to show only those with the specified predicate. The predicate can be an IRI (e.g., <http://xmlns.com/foaf/0.1/name>) or a prefixed name (e.g., foaf:name).
.TP
.B \-\-filter\-object \fIOBJECT\fR
Filter RDF triples to show only those with the specified object. The object can be an IRI, a prefixed name, or a literal value (e.g., "John Doe").
.TP
.B \-\-dark\-theme
Force dark theme colors suitable for dark terminal backgrounds.
.TP
.B \-\-light\-theme
Force light theme colors suitable for light terminal backgrounds.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-auto\-theme
Disable automatic background detection and use the explicitly configured colors from the configuration file.

.SH SUPPORTED FORMATS
.B rdfless
supports the following RDF serialization formats:

.TP
.B Turtle (.ttl)
Terse RDF Triple Language - a compact, human-readable syntax for RDF.
.TP
.B TriG (.trig)
An extension of Turtle that supports named graphs (quads).
.TP
.B N-Triples (.nt)
A line-based, plain text format for encoding RDF triples.
.TP
.B N-Quads (.nq)
An extension of N-Triples that supports named graphs (quads).

Format detection is based on file extensions. If no format is specified and the file extension is unrecognized, Turtle format is assumed.

.SH CONFIGURATION
.B rdfless
can be configured using a TOML configuration file. The configuration file is located at:
.IP \[bu] 2
.B Linux/macOS:
.I ~/.config/rdfless/config.toml
.IP \[bu] 2
.B Windows:
.I %APPDATA%\\rdfless\\config.toml

See
.BR rdfless-config (5)
for detailed information about the configuration file format.

.SH COLOR OUTPUT
.B rdfless
provides syntax highlighting with different colors for:
.IP \[bu] 2
.B Subjects
\- RDF resource subjects
.IP \[bu] 2
.B Predicates
\- RDF properties
.IP \[bu] 2
.B Objects
\- RDF resource objects
.IP \[bu] 2
.B Literals
\- String literals, numbers, and typed literals
.IP \[bu] 2
.B Prefixes
\- Namespace prefix declarations
.IP \[bu] 2
.B Graphs
\- Named graph identifiers (in TriG format)

Colors can be customized through the configuration file and support both named colors and hex color codes.

.SH AUTO-PAGING
.B rdfless
automatically enables paging for large outputs when:
.IP \[bu] 2
The output exceeds the terminal height
.IP \[bu] 2
Auto-paging is enabled in configuration (default: true)
.IP \[bu] 2
Output is going to a terminal (not redirected to a file or pipe)
.IP \[bu] 2
No explicit paging option is specified

Auto-paging can be configured or disabled through the configuration file.

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
.B rdfless data.ttl
Pretty-print a Turtle file with default formatting and colors.
.TP
.B rdfless \-\-expand data.ttl
Print the file with all prefixes expanded to full URIs.
.TP
.B rdfless \-\-format turtle data.rdf
Force interpretation of data.rdf as Turtle format.
.TP
.B rdfless data.ttl \-o formatted.ttl
Save the formatted output to a file (without ANSI colors).
.TP
.B rdfless \-\-dark\-theme \-o colored.ttl data.ttl
Save formatted output with dark theme colors to a file.
.TP
.B rdfless \-\-no\-pager large_file.ttl
Display a large file without using a pager.
.TP
.B cat data.ttl | rdfless
Read RDF data from standard input and pretty-print it.
.TP
.B rdfless file1.ttl file2.ttl
Process multiple files and concatenate their output.
.TP
.B rdfless \-\-continue\-on\-error malformed.ttl
Parse a file with potential errors, skipping invalid triples and continuing with valid ones.
.TP
.B rdfless \-\-filter\-subject "ex:john" data.ttl
Show only triples where the subject is ex:john.
.TP
.B rdfless \-\-filter\-predicate "foaf:name" \-\-expand data.ttl
Show only triples with foaf:name predicate and expand all prefixes.
.TP
.B rdfless \-\-filter\-object "John Doe" \-\-no\-pager data.ttl
Show only triples with "John Doe" as the object, without using a pager.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.B rdfless
exits with status 0 on success, and >0 if an error occurred. When the
.B \-\-continue\-on\-error
option is used, parsing errors in individual triples do not cause the program to exit with an error status; only fatal errors that prevent processing will result in a non-zero exit status.

.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/rdfless/config.toml
User configuration file (Linux/macOS)
.TP
.I %APPDATA%\\rdfless\\config.toml
User configuration file (Windows)

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR rdfless-config (5)

.SH BUGS
Report bugs to: https://github.com/larsw/rdfless/issues

.SH AUTHOR
Written by Lars Wilhelmsen.

.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2025 Lars Wilhelmsen.
.br
License BSD-3-Clause: https://opensource.org/licenses/BSD-3-Clause
.br
This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
